About the data tables:

OrigExchange -- this is the original data we started with. It has every premium that we got from the 16 exchanges. It includes federal data that was later found to be out-of-date. The only reason for keeping this table is for the records from the 15 states that run their own exchanges; many of them gave us very detailed data but the subsequent tables and our analysis only worked with the "lowest cost" plan at a given metal tier, for a given age in a given rating area. 

fedcounty -- this is county-level data for the federal exchange. We obtained this in February 2014 and it is more up-to-date than the federal data that is in the "origexchange" table. This (and all other federal data) only includes the lowest cost plan at each tier, plus the second lowest cost silver (benchmark). We needed to look at the county level (instead of rating area) because there are places where the benchmark is different from one county to the next within the same rating area. Ultimately, we collapsed this data down to the rating area to generate a single record for each rating area/age/metal combination for the "exchange" table below.

exchange -- this is rating area data, with one record for each age and metal tier (gold, bronze and silver only). it shows lowest cost plan for each rating area/metal/age combination. This is the main starting point for the data analysis we did in 2014. It includes all 16 exchanges.

oop -- this is the final table created for our analysis; it only includes lowest cost silver tier premiums. We started with the exchange table, then added records to represent various income levels (200% of poverty up to 1000% of poverty) and for each income level we calculated the tax credit, the out-of-pocket (oop) cost for the consumer after tax credits are applied, and then the pct of income they would spend annually on premiums. The tax credit is only calculated for those who are eligible (=<400% of poverty). Then each of the pctincome values are put into "buckets" (really they are quartiles), for each age/incomelevel combination. the buckets are not perfect quartiles because I went through and made sure the cut points were consistent in what was included in one bucket versus the next one.

